Title: Homage to Catalonia (1938)
Author: George Orwell

*

Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou be like unto him.

Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit.

--Proverbs XXVI. 5-6

*

Chapter 1


In the Lenin Barracks in Barcelona, the day before I joined the militia,
I saw an Italian militiaman standing in front of the officers' table.

He was a tough-looking youth of twenty-five or six, with reddish-yellow
hair and powerful shoulders. His peaked leather cap was pulled fiercely
over one eye. He was standing in profile to me, his chin on his breast,
gazing with a puzzled frown at a map which one of the officers had open
on the table. Something in his face deeply moved me. It was the face of
a man who would commit murder and throw away his life for a friend--the
kind of face you would expect in an Anarchist, though as likely as not
he was a Communist. There were both candour and ferocity in it; also the
pathetic reverence that illiterate people have for their supposed
superiors. Obviously he could not make head or tail of the map;
obviously he regarded map-reading as a stupendous intellectual feat. I
hardly know why, but I have seldom seen anyone--any man, I mean--to whom
I have taken such an immediate liking. While they were talking round the
table some remark brought it out that I was a foreigner. The Italian
raised his head and said quickly:

'_Italiano?_'

I answered in my bad Spanish: '_No, Inglés. Y tú?_'

'_Italiano_.'

As we went out he stepped across the room and gripped my hand very hard.
Queer, the affection you can feel for a stranger! It was as though his
spirit and mine had momentarily succeeded in bridging the gulf of
language and tradition and meeting in utter intimacy. I hoped he liked
me as well as I liked him. But I also knew that to retain my first
impression of him I must not see him again; and needless to say I never
did see him again. One was always making contacts of that kind in Spain.

I mention this Italian militiaman because he has stuck vividly in my
memory. With his shabby uniform and fierce pathetic face he typifies for
me the special atmosphere of that time. He is bound up with all my
memories of that period of the war--the red flags in Barcelona, the
gaunt trains full of shabby soldiers creeping to the front, the grey
war-stricken towns farther up the line, the muddy, ice-cold trenches in
the mountains.

This was in late December 1936, less than seven months ago as I write,
and yet it is a period that has already receded into enormous distance.
Later events have obliterated it much more completely than they have
obliterated 1935, or 1905, for that matter. I had come to Spain with
some notion of writing newspaper articles, but I had joined the militia
almost immediately, because at that time and in that atmosphere it
seemed the only conceivable thing to do. The Anarchists were still in
virtual control of Catalonia and the revolution was still in full swing.
To anyone who had been there since the beginning it probably seemed even
in December or January that the revolutionary period was ending; but
when one came straight from England the aspect of Barcelona was
something startling and overwhelming. It was the first time that I had
ever been in a town where the working class was in the saddle.

Practically every building of any size had been seized by the workers
and was draped with red flags or with the red and black flag of the
Anarchists; every wall was scrawled with the hammer and sickle and with
the initials of the revolutionary parties; almost every church had been
gutted and its images burnt. Churches here and there were being
systematically demolished by gangs of workmen. Every shop and café had
an inscription saying that it had been collectivized; even the
bootblacks had been collectivized and their boxes painted red and black.
Waiters and shop-walkers looked you in the face and treated you as an
equal. Servile and even ceremonial forms of speech had temporarily
disappeared. Nobody said '_Señor_' or '_Don_' or even '_Usted_'; everyone
called everyone else '_Comrade_' and '_Thou_', and said '_Salud!_' instead
of '_Buenos días_'. Tipping was forbidden by law since the time of Primo
de Rivera; almost my first experience was receiving a lecture from a hotel
manager for trying to tip a lift-boy. There were no private motor-cars,
they had all been commandeered, and all the trams and taxis and much of
the other transport were painted red and black. The revolutionary
posters were everywhere, flaming from the walls in clean reds and blues
that made the few remaining advertisements look like daubs of mud. Down
the Ramblas, the wide central artery of the town where crowds of people
streamed constantly to and fro, the loudspeakers were bellowing
revolutionary songs all day and far into the night. And it was the
aspect of the crowds that was the queerest thing of all. In outward
appearance it was a town in which the wealthy classes had practically
ceased to exist. Except for a small number of women and foreigners there
were no 'well-dressed' people at all. Practically everyone wore rough
working-class clothes, or blue overalls, or some variant of the militia
uniform. All this was queer and moving. There was much in it that I did
not understand, in some ways I did not even like it, but I recognized it
immediately as a state of affairs worth fighting for. Also I believed
that things were as they appeared, that this was really a workers' State
and that the entire bourgeoisie had either fled, been killed, or
voluntarily come over to the workers' side; I did not realize that great
numbers of well-to-do bourgeois were simply lying low and disguising
themselves as proletarians for the time being.

Together with all this there was something of the evil atmosphere of
war. The town had a gaunt untidy look, roads and buildings were in poor
repair, the streets at night were dimly lit for fear of air-raids, the
shops were mostly shabby and half-empty. Meat was scarce and milk
practically unobtainable, there was a shortage of coal, sugar, and
petrol, and a really serious shortage of bread. Even at this period the
bread-queues were often hundreds of yards long. Yet so far as one could
judge the people were contented and hopeful. There was no unemployment,
and the price of living was still extremely low; you saw very few
conspicuously destitute people, and no beggars except the gipsies. Above
all, there was a belief in the revolution and the future, a feeling of
having suddenly emerged into an era of equality and freedom. Human
beings were trying to behave as human beings and not as cogs in the
capitalist machine. In the barbers' shops were Anarchist notices (the
barbers were mostly Anarchists) solemnly explaining that barbers were no
longer slaves. In the streets were coloured posters appealing to
prostitutes to stop being prostitutes. To anyone from the hard-boiled,
sneering civilization of the English-speaking races there was something
rather pathetic in the literalness with which these idealistic Spaniards
took the hackneyed phrases of revolution. At that time revolutionary
ballads of the naivest kind, all about proletarian brotherhood and the
wickedness of Mussolini, were being sold on the streets for a few
centimes each. I have often seen an illiterate militiaman buy one of
these ballads, laboriously spell out the words, and then, when he had
got the hang of it, begin singing it to an appropriate tune.

All this time I was at the Lenin Barracks, ostensibly in training for
the front. When I joined the militia I had been told that I should be
sent to the front the next day, but in fact I had to wait while a fresh
_centuria_ was got ready. The workers' militias, hurriedly raised by the
trade unions at the beginning of the war, had not yet been organized on
an ordinary army basis. The units of command were the 'section', of
about thirty men, the _centuria_, of about a hundred men, and the
'column', which in practice meant any large number of men. The Lenin
Barracks was a block of splendid stone buildings with a riding-school
and enormous cobbled courtyards; it had been a cavalry barracks and had
been captured during the July fighting. My _centuria_ slept in one of the
stables, under the stone mangers where the names of the cavalry chargers
were still inscribed. All the horses had been seized and sent to the
front, but the whole place still smelt of horse-piss and rotten oats. I
was at the barracks about a week. Chiefly I remember the horsy smells,
the quavering bugle-calls (all our buglers were amateurs--I first
learned the Spanish bugle-calls by listening to them outside the Fascist
lines), the tramp-tramp of hobnailed boots in the barrack yard, the long
morning parades in the wintry sunshine, the wild games of football,
fifty a side, in the gravelled riding-school. There were perhaps a
thousand men at the barracks, and a score or so of women, apart from the
militiamen's wives who did the cooking. There were still women serving
in the militias, though not very many. In the early battles they had
fought side by side with the men as a matter of course. It is a thing
that seems natural in time of revolution. Ideas were changing already,
however. The militiamen had to be kept out of the riding-school while
the women were drilling there because they laughed at the women and put
them off. A few months earlier no one would have seen anything comic in
a woman handling a gun.

The whole barracks was in the state of filth and chaos to which the
militia reduced every building they occupied and which seems to be one
of the by-products of revolution. In every corner you came upon piles of
smashed furniture, broken saddles, brass cavalry-helmets, empty
sabre-scabbards, and decaying food. There was frightful wastage of food,
especially bread. From my barrack-room alone a basketful of bread was
thrown away at every meal--a disgraceful thing when the civilian
population was short of it. We ate at long trestle-tables out of
permanently greasy tin pannikins, and drank out of a dreadful thing
called a _porrón_. A _porrón_ is a sort of glass bottle with a pointed
spout from which a thin jet of wine spurts out whenever you tip it up;
you can thus drink from a distance, without touching it with your lips,
and it can be passed from hand to hand. I went on strike and demanded a
drinking-cup as soon as I saw a _porrón_ in use. To my eye the things
were altogether too like bed-bottles, especially when they were filled
with white wine.

By degrees they were issuing the recruits with uniforms, and because
this was Spain everything was issued piecemeal, so that it was never
quite certain who had received what, and various of the things we most
needed, such as belts and cartridge-boxes, were not issued till the last
moment, when the train was actually waiting to take us to the front. I
have spoken of the militia 'uniform', which probably gives a wrong
impression. It was not exactly a uniform. Perhaps a 'multiform' would be
the proper name for it. Everyone's clothes followed the same general
plan, but they were never quite the same in any two cases. Practically
everyone in the army wore corduroy knee-breeches, but there the
uniformity ended. Some wore puttees, others corduroy gaiters, others
leather leggings or high boots. Everyone wore a zipper jacket, but some
of the jackets were of leather, others of wool and of every conceivable
colour. The kinds of cap were about as numerous as their wearers. It was
usual to adorn the front of your cap with a party badge, and in addition
nearly every man wore a red or red and black handkerchief round his
throat. A militia column at that time was an extraordinary-looking
rabble. But the clothes had to be issued as this or that factory rushed
them out, and they were not bad clothes considering the circumstances.
The shirts and socks were wretched cotton things, however, quite useless
against cold. I hate to think of what the militiamen must have gone
through in the earlier months before anything was organized. I remember
coming upon a newspaper of only about two months earlier in which one of
the P.O.U.M. leaders, after a visit to the front, said that he would try
to see to it that 'every militiaman had a blanket'. A phrase to make you
shudder if you have ever slept in a trench.

On my second day at the barracks there began what was comically called
'instruction'. At the beginning there were frightful scenes of chaos.
The recruits were mostly boys of sixteen or seventeen from the back
streets of Barcelona, full of revolutionary ardour but completely
ignorant of the meaning of war. It was impossible even to get them to
stand in line. Discipline did not exist; if a man disliked an order he
would step out of the ranks and argue fiercely with the officer. The
lieutenant who instructed us was a stout, fresh-faced, pleasant young
man who had previously been a Regular Army officer, and still looked
like one, with his smart carriage and spick-and-span uniform. Curiously
enough he was a sincere and ardent Socialist. Even more than the men
themselves he insisted upon complete social equality between all ranks.
I remember his pained surprise when an ignorant recruit addressed him as
'_Señor_'. 'What! _Señor_? Who is that calling me _Señor_? Are we not all
comrades?' I doubt whether it made his job any easier. Meanwhile the raw
recruits were getting no military training that could be of the
slightest use to them. I had been told that foreigners were not obliged
to attend 'instruction' (the Spaniards, I noticed, had a pathetic belief
that all foreigners knew more of military matters than themselves), but
naturally I turned out with the others. I was very anxious to learn how
to use a machine-gun; it was a weapon I had never had a chance to
handle. To my dismay I found that we were taught nothing about the use
of weapons. The so-called instruction was simply parade-ground drill of
the most antiquated, stupid kind; right turn, left turn, about turn,
marching at attention in column of threes and all the rest of that
useless nonsense which I had learned when I was fifteen years old. It
was an extraordinary form for the training of a guerilla army to take.
Obviously if you have only a few days in which to train a soldier, you
must teach him the things he will most need; how to take cover, how to
advance across open ground, how to mount guards and build a
parapet--above all, how to use his weapons. Yet this mob of eager
children, who were going to be thrown into the front line in a few days'
time, were not even taught how to fire a rifle or pull the pin out of a
bomb. At the time I did not grasp that this was because there were no
weapons to be had. In the P.O.U.M. militia the shortage of rifles was so
desperate that fresh troops reaching the front always had to take their
rifles from the troops they relieved in the line. In the whole of the
Lenin Barracks there were, I believe, no rifles except those used by the
sentries.

After a few days, though still a complete rabble by any ordinary
standard, we were considered fit to be seen in public, and in the
mornings we were marched out to the public gardens on the hill beyond
the Plaza de España. This was the common drill-ground of all the party
militias, besides the Carabineros and the first contingents of the newly
formed Popular Army. Up in the public gardens it was a strange and
heartening sight. Down every path and alley-way, amid the formal
flower-beds, squads and companies of men marched stiffly to and fro,
throwing out their chests and trying desperately to look like soldiers.
All of them were unarmed and none completely in uniform, though on most
of them the militia uniform was breaking out in patches here and there.
The procedure was always very much the same. For three hours we strutted
to and fro (the Spanish marching step is very short and rapid), then we
halted, broke the ranks, and flocked thirstily to a little grocer's shop
which was half-way down the hill and was doing a roaring trade in cheap
wine. Everyone was very friendly to me. As an Englishman I was something
of a curiosity, and the Carabinero officers made much of me and stood me
drinks. Meanwhile, whenever I could get our lieutenant into a corner, I
was clamouring to be instructed in the use of a machine-gun. I used to
drag my Hugo's dictionary out of my pocket and start on him in my
villainous Spanish:

'_Yo sé manejar fusil. No sé manejar ametralladora. Quiero apprender
ametralladora. Quándo vamos apprender ametralladora?_'

The answer was always a harassed smile and a promise that there should
be machine-gun instruction _mañana_. Needless to say _mañana_ never
came. Several days passed and the recruits learned to march in step and
spring to attention almost smartly, but if they knew which end of a
rifle the bullet came out of, that was all they knew. One day an armed
Carabinero strolled up to us when we were halting and allowed us to
examine his rifle. It turned out that in the whole of my section no one
except myself even knew how to load the rifle, much less how to take
aim.

All this time I was having the usual struggles with the Spanish
language. Apart from myself there was only one Englishman at the
barracks, and nobody even among the officers spoke a word of
French. Things were not made easier for me by the fact that when my
companions spoke to one another they generally spoke in Catalan. The
only way I could get along was to carry everywhere a small dictionary
which I whipped out of my pocket in moments of crisis. But I would
sooner be a foreigner in Spain than in most countries. How easy it is to
make friends in Spain! Within a day or two there was a score of
militiamen who called me by my Christian name, showed me the ropes, and
overwhelmed me with hospitality. I am not writing a book of propaganda
and I do not want to idealize the P.O.U.M. militia. The whole
militia-system had serious faults, and the men themselves were a mixed
lot, for by this time voluntary recruitment was falling off and many of
the best men were already at the front or dead. There was always among
us a certain percentage who were completely useless. Boys of fifteen
were being brought up for enlistment by their parents, quite openly for
the sake of the ten pesetas a day which was the militiaman's wage; also
for the sake of the bread which the militia received in plenty and could
smuggle home to their parents. But I defy anyone to be thrown as I was
among the Spanish working class--I ought perhaps to say the Catalan
working class, for apart from a few Aragónese and Andalusians I mixed
only with Catalans--and not be struck by their essential decency; above
all, their straightforwardness and generosity. A Spaniard's generosity,
in the ordinary sense of the word, is at times almost embarrassing. If
you ask him for a cigarette he will force the whole packet upon you. And
beyond this there is generosity in a deeper sense, a real largeness of
spirit, which I have met with again and again in the most unpromising
circumstances. Some of the journalists and other foreigners who
travelled in Spain during the war have declared that in secret the
Spaniards were bitterly jealous of foreign aid. All I can say is that I
never observed anything of the kind. I remember that a few days before I
left the barracks a group of men returned on leave from the front. They
were talking excitedly about their experiences and were full of
enthusiasm for some French troops who had been next to them at Huesca.
The French were very brave, they said; adding enthusiastically: '_Más
valientes que nosotros_'--'Braver than we are!' Of course I demurred,
whereupon they explained that the French knew more of the art of
war--were more expert with bombs, machine-guns, and so forth. Yet the
remark was significant. An Englishman would cut his hand off sooner than
say a thing like that.

Every foreigner who served in the militia spent his first few weeks in
learning to love the Spaniards and in being exasperated by certain of
their characteristics. In the front line my own exasperation sometimes
reached the pitch of fury. The Spaniards are good at many things, but
not at making war. All foreigners alike are appalled by their
inefficiency, above all their maddening unpunctuality. The one Spanish
word that no foreigner can avoid learning is _mañana_--'tomorrow'
(literally, 'the morning'). Whenever it is conceivably possible, the
business of today is put off until _mañana_. This is so notorious that
even the Spaniards themselves make jokes about it. In Spain nothing,
from a meal to a battle, ever happens at the appointed time. As a
general rule things happen too late, but just occasionally--just so that
you shan't even be able to depend on their happening late--they happen
too early. A train which is due to leave at eight will normally leave at
any time between nine and ten, but perhaps once a week, thanks to some
private whim of the engine-driver, it leaves at half past seven. Such
things can be a little trying. In theory I rather admire the Spaniards
for not sharing our Northern time-neurosis; but unfortunately I share it
myself.

After endless rumours, _mañanas_, and delays we were suddenly ordered
to the front at two hours' notice, when much of our equipment was still
unissued. There were terrible tumults in the quartermaster's store; in
the end numbers of men had to leave without their full equipment. The
barracks had promptly filled with women who seemed to have sprung up
from the ground and were helping their men-folk to roll their blankets
and pack their kit-bags. It was rather humiliating that I had to be
shown how to put on my new leather cartridge-boxes by a Spanish girl,
the wife of Williams, the other English militiaman. She was a gentle,
dark-eyed, intensely feminine creature who looked as though her
life-work was to rock a cradle, but who as a matter of fact had fought
bravely in the street-battles of July. At this time she was carrying a
baby which was born just ten months after the outbreak of war and had
perhaps been begotten behind a barricade.

The train was due to leave at eight, and it was about ten past eight
when the harassed, sweating officers managed to marshal us in the
barrack square. I remember very vividly the torchlit scene--the uproar
and excitement, the red flags flapping in the torchlight, the massed
ranks of militiamen with their knapsacks on their backs and their rolled
blankets worn bandolier-wise across the shoulder; and the shouting and
the clatter of boots and tin pannikins, and then a tremendous and
finally successful hissing for silence; and then some political
commissar standing beneath a huge rolling red banner and making us a
speech in Catalan. Finally they marched us to the station, taking the
longest route, three or four miles, so as to show us to the whole town.
In the Ramblas they halted us while a borrowed band played some
revolutionary tune or other. Once again the conquering-hero
stuff--shouting and enthusiasm, red flags and red and black flags
everywhere, friendly crowds thronging the pavement to have a look at us,
women waving from the windows. How natural it all seemed then; how
remote and improbable now! The train was packed so tight with men that
there was barely room even on the floor, let alone on the seats. At the
last moment Williams's wife came rushing down the platform and gave us a
bottle of wine and a foot of that bright red sausage which tastes of
soap and gives you diarrhoea. The train crawled out of Catalonia and on
to the plateau of Aragón at the normal wartime speed of something under
twenty kilometres an hour.



Chapter 2


Barbastro, though a long way from the front line, looked bleak and
chipped. Swarms of militiamen in shabby uniforms wandered up and down
the streets, trying to keep warm. On a ruinous wall I came upon a poster
dating from the previous year and announcing that 'six handsome bulls'
would be killed in the arena on such and such a date. How forlorn its
faded colours looked! Where were the handsome bulls and the handsome
bull-fighters now? It appeared that even in Barcelona there were hardly
any bullfights nowadays; for some reason all the best matadors were
Fascists.

They sent my company by lorry to Sietamo, then westward to Alcubierre,
which was just behind the line fronting Zaragoza. Sietamo had been
fought over three times before the Anarchists finally took it in
October, and parts of it were smashed to pieces by shell-fire and most
of the houses pockmarked by rifle-bullets. We were 1500 feet above
sea-level now. It was beastly cold, with dense mists that came swirling
up from nowhere. Between Sietamo and Alcubierre the lorry-driver lost
his way (this was one of the regular features of the war) and we were
wandering for hours in the mist. It was late at night when we reached
Alcubierre. Somebody shepherded us through morasses of mud into a
mule-stable where we dug ourselves down into the chaff and promptly fell
asleep. Chaff is not bad to sleep in when it is clean, not so good as
hay but better than straw. It was only in the morning light that I
discovered that the chaff was full of breadcrusts, torn newspapers,
bones, dead rats, and jagged milk tins.

We were near the front line now, near enough to smell the characteristic
smell of war--in my experience a smell of excrement and decaying food.
Alcubierre had never been shelled and was in a better state than most of
the villages immediately behind the line. Yet I believe that even in
peacetime you could not travel in that part of Spain without being
struck by the peculiar squalid misery of the Aragónese villages. They
are built like fortresses, a mass of mean little houses of mud and stone
huddling round the church, and even in spring you see hardly a flower
anywhere; the houses have no gardens, only back-yards where ragged fowls
skate over the beds of mule-dung. It was vile weather, with alternate
mist and rain. The narrow earth roads had been churned into a sea of
mud, in places two feet deep, through which the lorries struggled with
racing wheels and the peasants led their clumsy carts which were pulled
by strings of mules, sometimes as many as six in a string, always
pulling tandem. The constant come-and-go of troops had reduced the
village to a state of unspeakable filth. It did not possess and never
had possessed such a thing as a lavatory or a drain of any kind, and
there was not a square yard anywhere where you could tread without
watching your step. The church had long been used as a latrine; so had
all the fields for a quarter of a mile round. I never think of my first
two months at war without thinking of wintry stubble fields whose edges
are crusted with dung.

Two days passed and no rifles were issued to us. When you had been to
the Comite de Guerra and inspected the row of holes in the wall-holes
made by rifle-volleys, various Fascists having been executed there--you
had seen all the sights that Alcubierre contained. Up in the front line
things were obviously quiet; very few wounded were coming in. The chief
excitement was the arrival of Fascist deserters, who were brought under
guard from the front line. Many of the troops opposite us on this part
of the line were not Fascists at all, merely wretched conscripts who had
been doing their military service at the time when war broke out and
were only too anxious to escape. Occasionally small batches of them took
the risk of slipping across to our lines. No doubt more would have done
so if their relatives had not been in Fascist territory. These deserters
were the first 'real' Fascists I had ever seen. It struck me that they
were indistinguishable from ourselves, except that they wore khaki
overalls. They were always ravenously hungry when they arrived--natural
enough after a day or two of dodging about in no man's land, but it was
always triumphantly pointed to as a proof that the Fascist troops were
starving. I watched one of them being fed in a peasant's house. It was
somehow rather a pitiful sight. A tall boy of twenty, deeply windburnt,
with his clothes in rags, crouched over the fire shovelling a
pannikinful of stew into himself at desperate speed; and all the while
his eyes flitted nervously round the ring of militiamen who stood
watching him. I think he still half-believed that we were bloodthirsty
'Reds' and were going to shoot him as soon as he had finished his meal;
the armed man who guarded him kept stroking his shoulder and making
reassuring noises. On one memorable day fifteen deserters arrived in a
single batch. They were led through the village in triumph with a man
riding in front of them on a white horse. I managed to take a rather
blurry photograph which was stolen from me later.

On our third morning in Alcubierre the rifles arrived. A sergeant with a
coarse dark-yellow face was handing them out in the mule-stable. I got a
shock of dismay when I saw the thing they gave me. It was a German
Mauser dated 1896--more than forty years old! It was rusty, the bolt was
stiff, the wooden barrel-guard was split; one glance down the muzzle
showed that it was corroded and past praying for. Most of the rifles
were equally bad, some of them even worse, and no attempt was made to
give the best weapons to the men who knew how to use them. The best
rifle of the lot, only ten years old, was given to a half-witted little
beast of fifteen, known to everyone as the _maricón_ (Nancy-boy). The
sergeant gave us five minutes' 'instruction', which consisted in
explaining how you loaded a rifle and how you took the bolt to pieces.
Many of the militiamen had never had a gun in their hands before, and
very few, I imagine, knew what the sights were for. Cartridges were
handed out, fifty to a man, and then the ranks were formed and we
strapped our kits on our backs and set out for the front line, about
three miles away.

The _centuria_, eighty men and several dogs, wound raggedly up the road.
Every militia column had at least one dog attached to it as a mascot.
One wretched brute that marched with us had had P.O.U.M. branded on it
in huge letters and slunk along as though conscious that there was
something wrong with its appearance. At the head of the column, beside
the red flag, Georges Kopp, the stout Belgian _commandante_, was riding a
black horse; a little way ahead a youth from the brigand-like militia
cavalry pranced to and fro, galloping up every piece of rising ground
and posing himself in picturesque attitudes at the summit. The splendid
horses of the Spanish cavalry had been captured in large numbers during
the revolution and handed over to the militia, who, of course, were busy
riding them to death.

The road wound between yellow infertile fields, untouched since last
year's harvest. Ahead of us was the low sierra that lies between
Alcubierre and Zaragoza. We were getting near the front line now, near
the bombs, the machine-guns, and the mud. In secret I was frightened. I
knew the line was quiet at present, but unlike most of the men about me
I was old enough to remember the Great War, though not old enough to
have fought in it. War, to me, meant roaring projectiles and skipping
shards of steel; above all it meant mud, lice, hunger, and cold. It is
curious, but I dreaded the cold much more than I dreaded the enemy. The
thought of it had been haunting me all the time I was in Barcelona; I
had even lain awake at nights thinking of the cold in the trenches, the
stand-to's in the grisly dawns, the long hours on sentry-go with a
frosted rifle, the icy mud that would slop over my boot-tops. I admit,
too, that I felt a kind of horror as I looked at the people I was
marching among. You cannot possibly conceive what a rabble we looked. We
straggled along with far less cohesion than a flock of sheep; before we
had gone two miles the rear of the column was out of sight. And quite
half of the so-called men were children--but I mean literally children,
of sixteen years old at the very most. Yet they were all happy and
excited at the prospect of getting to the front at last. As we neared
the line the boys round the red flag in front began to utter shouts of
'_Visca P.O.U.M.!_' '_Fascistas--maricones_!' and so forth--shouts which
were meant to be war-like and menacing, but which, from those childish
throats, sounded as pathetic as the cries of kittens. It seemed dreadful
that the defenders of the Republic should be this mob of ragged children
carrying worn-out rifles which they did not know how to use. I remember
wondering what would happen if a Fascist aeroplane passed our way
whether the airman would even bother to dive down and give us a burst
from his machine-gun. Surely even from the air he could see that we were
not real soldiers?

As the road struck into the sierra we branched off to the right and
climbed a narrow mule-track that wound round the mountain-side. The
hills in that part of Spain are of a queer formation, horseshoe-shaped
with flattish tops and very steep sides running down into immense
ravines. On the higher slopes nothing grows except stunted shrubs and
heath, with the white bones of the limestone sticking out everywhere. The
front line here was not a continuous line of trenches, which would have
been impossible in such mountainous country; it was simply a chain of
fortified posts, always known as 'positions', perched on each hill-top.
In the distance you could see our 'position' at the crown of the
horseshoe; a ragged barricade of sand-bags, a red flag fluttering, the
smoke of dug-out fires. A little nearer, and you could smell a sickening
sweetish stink that lived in my nostrils for weeks afterwards. Into the
cleft immediately behind the position all the refuse of months had been
tipped--a deep festering bed of breadcrusts, excrement, and rusty tins.

The company we were relieving were getting their kits together. They had
been three months in the line; their uniforms were caked with mud, their
boots falling to pieces, their faces mostly bearded. The captain
commanding the position, Levinski by name, but known to everyone as
Benjamin, and by birth a Polish Jew, but speaking French as his native
language, crawled out of his dug-out and greeted us. He was a short
youth of about twenty-five, with stiff black hair and a pale eager face
which at this period of the war was always very dirty. A few stray
bullets were cracking high overhead. The position was a semi-circular
enclosure about fifty yards across, with a parapet that was partly
sand-bags and partly lumps of limestone. There were thirty or forty
dug-outs running into the ground like rat-holes. Williams, myself, and
Williams's Spanish brother-in-law made a swift dive for the nearest
unoccupied dug-out that looked habitable. Somewhere in front an
occasional rifle banged, making queer rolling echoes among the stony
hills. We had just dumped our kits and were crawling out of the dug-out
when there was another bang and one of the children of our company
rushed back from the parapet with his face pouring blood. He had fired
his rifle and had somehow managed to blow out the bolt; his scalp was
torn to ribbons by the splinters of the burst cartridge-case. It was our
first casualty, and, characteristically, self-inflicted.

In the afternoon we did our first guard and Benjamin showed us round the
position. In front of the parapet there ran a system of narrow trenches
hewn out of the rock, with extremely primitive loopholes made of piles
of limestone. There were twelve sentries, placed at various points in
the trench and behind the inner parapet. In front of the trench was the
barbed wire, and then the hillside slid down into a seemingly bottomless
ravine; opposite were naked hills, in places mere cliffs of rock, all
grey and wintry, with no life anywhere, not even a bird. I peered
cautiously through a loophole, trying to find the Fascist trench.

'Where are the enemy?'

Benjamin waved his hand expansively. 'Over zere.' (Benjamin spoke
English--terrible English.)

'But _where?_'

According to my ideas of trench warfare the Fascists would be fifty or a
hundred yards away. I could see nothing--seemingly their trenches were
very well concealed. Then with a shock of dismay I saw where Benjamin
was pointing; on the opposite hill-top, beyond the ravine, seven hundred
metres away at the very least, the tiny outline of a parapet and a
red-and-yellow flag--the Fascist position. I was indescribably
disappointed. We were nowhere near them! At that range our rifles were
completely useless. But at this moment there was a shout of excitement.
Two Fascists, greyish figurines in the distance, were scrambling up the
naked hill-side opposite. Benjamin grabbed the nearest man's rifle, took
aim, and pulled the trigger. Click! A dud cartridge; I thought it a bad
omen.

The new sentries were no sooner in the trench than they began firing a
terrific fusillade at nothing in particular. I could see the Fascists,
tiny as ants, dodging to and fro behind their parapet, and sometimes a
black dot which was a head would pause for a moment, impudently exposed.
It was obviously no use firing. But presently the sentry on my left,
leaving his post in the typical Spanish fashion, sidled up to me and
began urging me to fire. I tried to explain that at that range and with
these rifles you could not hit a man except by accident. But he was only
a child, and he kept motioning with his rifle towards one of the dots,
grinning as eagerly as a dog that expects a pebble to be thrown. Finally
I put my sights up to seven hundred and let fly. The dot disappeared.
I hope it went near enough to make him jump. It was the first time in
my life that I had fired a gun at a human being.

Now that I had seen the front I was profoundly disgusted. They called
this war! And we were hardly even in touch with the enemy! I made no
attempt to keep my head below the level of the trench. A little while
later, however, a bullet shot past my ear with a vicious crack and
banged into the parados behind. Alas! I ducked. All my life I had sworn
that I would not duck the first time a bullet passed over me; but the
movement appears to be instinctive, and almost everybody does it at
least once.



Chapter 3


In trench warfare five things are important: firewood, food, tobacco,
candles, and the enemy. In winter on the Zaragoza front they were
important in that order, with the enemy a bad last. Except at night,
when a surprise-attack was always conceivable, nobody bothered about the
enemy. They were simply remote black insects whom one occasionally saw
hopping to and fro. The real preoccupation of both armies was trying to
keep warm.

I ought to say in passing that all the time I was in Spain I saw very
little fighting. I was on the Aragón front from January to May, and
between January and late March little or nothing happened on that front,
except at Teruel. In March there was heavy fighting round Huesca, but I
personally played only a minor part in it. Later, in June, there was the
disastrous attack on Huesca in which several thousand men were killed in
a single day, but I had been wounded and disabled before that happened.
The things that one normally thinks of as the horrors of war seldom
happened to me. No aeroplane ever dropped a bomb anywhere near me, I do
not think a shell ever exploded within fifty yards of me, and I was only
in hand-to-hand fighting once (once is once too often, I may say). Of
course I was often under heavy machine-gun fire, but usually at longish
ranges. Even at Huesca you were generally safe enough if you took
reasonable precautions.

Up here, in the hills round Zaragoza, it was simply the mingled boredom
and discomfort of stationary warfare. A life as uneventful as a city
clerk's, and almost as regular. Sentry-go, patrols, digging; digging,
patrols, sentry-go. On every hill-top, Fascist or Loyalist, a knot of
ragged, dirty men shivering round their flag and trying to keep warm.
And all day and night the meaningless bullets wandering across the empty
valleys and only by some rare improbable chance getting home on a human
body.

Often I used to gaze round the wintry landscape and marvel at the
futility of it all. The inconclusiveness of such a kind of war! Earlier,
about October, there had been savage fighting for all these hills; then,
because the lack of men and arms, especially artillery, made any
large-scale operation impossible, each army had dug itself in and
settled down on the hill-tops it had won. Over to our right there was a
small outpost, also P.O.U.M., and on the spur to our left, at seven
o'clock of us, a P.S.U.C. position faced a taller spur with several
small Fascist posts dotted on its peaks. The so-called line zigzagged to
and fro in a pattern that would have been quite unintelligible if every
position had not flown a flag. The P.O.U.M. and P.S.U.C. flags were red,
those of the Anarchists red and black; the Fascists generally flew the
monarchist flag (red-yellow-red), but occasionally they flew the flag
of the Republic (red-yellow-purple).* The scenery was stupendous,
if you could forget that every mountain-top was occupied by troops and
was therefore littered with tin cans and crusted with dung. To the right
of us the sierra bent south-eastwards and made way for the wide, veined
valley that stretched across to Huesca. In the middle of the plain a few
tiny cubes sprawled like a throw of dice; this was the town of Robres,
which was in Loyalist possession. Often in the mornings the valley was
hidden under seas of cloud, out of which the hills rose flat and blue,
giving the landscape a strange resemblance to a photographic negative.
Beyond Huesca there were more hills of the same formation as our own,
streaked with a pattern of snow which altered day by day. In the far
distance the monstrous peaks of the Pyrenees, where the snow never
melts, seemed to float upon nothing. Even down in the plain everything
looked dead and bare. The hills opposite us were grey and wrinkled like
the skins of elephants. Almost always the sky was empty of birds. I do
not think I have ever seen a country where there were so few birds. The
only birds one saw at any time were a kind of magpie, and the coveys of
partridges that startled one at night with their sudden whirring, and,
very rarely, the flights of eagles that drifted slowly over, generally
followed by rifle-shots which they did not deign to notice.

[* Footnote: An errata note found in Orwell's papers after his death:
"Am not now completely certain that I ever saw Fascists flying the
republican flag, though I _think_ they sometimes flew it with a small
imposed swastika."]

At night and in misty weather, patrols were sent out in the valley
between ourselves and the Fascists. The job was not popular, it was too
cold and too easy to get lost, and I soon found that I could get leave
to go out on patrol as often as I wished. In the huge jagged ravines
there were no paths or tracks of any kind; you could only find your way
about by making successive journeys and noting fresh landmarks each
time. As the bullet flies the nearest Fascist post was seven hundred
metres from our own, but it was a mile and a half by the only
practicable route. It was rather fun wandering about the dark valleys
with the stray bullets flying high overhead like redshanks whistling.
Better than night-time were the heavy mists, which often lasted all day
and which had a habit of clinging round the hill-tops and leaving the
valleys clear. When you were anywhere near the Fascist lines you had to
creep at a snail's pace; it was very difficult to move quietly on those
hill-sides, among the crackling shrubs and tinkling limestones. It was
only at the third or fourth attempt that I managed to find my way to the
Fascist lines. The mist was very thick, and I crept up to the barbed
wire to listen. I could hear the Fascists talking and singing inside.
Then to my alarm I heard several of them coming down the hill towards
me. I cowered behind a bush that suddenly seemed very small, and tried
to cock my rifle without noise. However, they branched off and did not
come within sight of me. Behind the bush where I was hiding I came upon
various relics of the earlier fighting--a pile of empty cartridge-cases,
a leather cap with a bullet-hole in it, and a red flag, obviously one of
our own. I took it back to the position, where it was unsentimentally
torn up for cleaning-rags.

I had been made a corporal, or _cabo_, as it was called, as soon as we
reached the front, and was in command of a guard of twelve men. It was
no sinecure, especially at first. The _centuria_ was an untrained mob
composed mostly of boys in their teens. Here and there in the militia
you came across children as young as eleven or twelve, usually refugees
from Fascist territory who had been enlisted as militiamen as the
easiest way of providing for them. As a rule they were employed on light
work in the rear, but sometimes they managed to worm their way to the
front line, where they were a public menace. I remember one little brute
throwing a hand-grenade into the dug-out fire 'for a joke'. At Monte
Pocero I do not think there was anyone younger than fifteen, but the
average age must have been well under twenty. Boys of this age ought
never to be used in the front line, because they cannot stand the lack
of sleep which is inseparable from trench warfare. At the beginning it
was almost impossible to keep our position properly guarded at night.
The wretched children of my section could only be roused by dragging
them out of their dug-outs feet foremost, and as soon as your back was
turned they left their posts and slipped into shelter; or they would
even, in spite of the frightful cold, lean up against the wall of the
trench and fall fast asleep. Luckily the enemy were very unenterprising.
There were nights when it seemed to me that our position could be
stormed by twenty Boy Scouts armed with airguns, or twenty Girl Guides
armed with battledores, for that matter.

At this time and until much later the Catalan militias were still on the
same basis as they had been at the beginning of the war. In the early
days of Franco's revolt the militias had been hurriedly raised by the
various trade unions and political parties; each was essentially a
political organization, owing allegiance to its party as much as to the
central Government. When the Popular Army, which was a 'non-political'
army organized on more or less ordinary lines, was raised at the
beginning of 1937, the party militias were theoretically incorporated in
it. But for a long time the only changes that occurred were on paper;
the new Popular Army troops did not reach the Aragón front in any
numbers till June, and until that time the militia-system remained
unchanged. The essential point of the system was social equality between
officers and men. Everyone from general to private drew the same pay,
ate the same food, wore the same clothes, and mingled on terms of
complete equality. If you wanted to slap the general commanding the
division on the back and ask him for a cigarette, you could do so, and
no one thought it curious. In theory at any rate each militia was a
democracy and not a hierarchy. It was understood that orders had to be
obeyed, but it was also understood that when you gave an order you gave
it as comrade to comrade and not as superior to inferior. There were
officers and N.C.O.s but there was no military rank in the ordinary
sense; no titles, no badges, no heel-clicking and saluting. They had
attempted to produce within the militias a sort of temporary working
model of the classless society. Of course there was no perfect equality,
but there was a nearer approach to it than I had ever seen or than I
would have thought conceivable in time of war.

But I admit that at first sight the state of affairs at the front
horrified me. How on earth could the war be won by an army of this type?
It was what everyone was saying at the time, and though it was true it
was also unreasonable. For in the circumstances the militias could not
have been much better than they were. A modern mechanized army does not
spring up out of the ground, and if the Government had waited until it
had trained troops at its disposal, Franco would never have been
resisted. Later it became the fashion to decry the militias, and
therefore to pretend that the faults which were due to lack of training
and weapons were the result of the equalitarian system. Actually, a newly
raised draft of militia was an undisciplined mob not because the
officers called the private 'Comrade' but because raw troops are
_always_ an undisciplined mob. In practice the democratic
'revolutionary' type of discipline is more reliable than might be
expected. In a workers' army discipline is theoretically voluntary. It
is based on class-loyalty, whereas the discipline of a bourgeois
conscript army is based ultimately on fear. (The Popular Army that
replaced the militias was midway between the two types.) In the militias
the bullying and abuse that go on in an ordinary army would never have
been tolerated for a moment. The normal military punishments existed,
but they were only invoked for very serious offences. When a man refused
to obey an order you did not immediately get him punished; you first
appealed to him in the name of comradeship. Cynical people with no
experience of handling men will say instantly that this would never
'work', but as a matter of fact it does 'work' in the long run. The
discipline of even the worst drafts of militia visibly improved as time
went on. In January the job of keeping a dozen raw recruits up to the
mark almost turned my hair grey. In May for a short while I was
acting-lieutenant in command of about thirty men, English and Spanish.
We had all been under fire for months, and I never had the slightest
difficulty in getting an order obeyed or in getting men to volunteer for
a dangerous job. 'Revolutionary' discipline depends on political
consciousness--on an understanding of _why_ orders must be obeyed; it
takes time to diffuse this, but it also takes time to drill a man into
an automaton on the barrack-square. The journalists who sneered at the
militia-system seldom remembered that the militias had to hold the line
while the Popular Army was training in the rear. And it is a tribute to
the strength of 'revolutionary' discipline that the militias stayed in
the field at all. For until about June 1937 there was nothing to keep
them there, except class loyalty. Individual deserters could be
shot--were shot, occasionally--but if a thousand men had decided to walk
out of the line together there was no force to stop them. A conscript
army in the same circumstances--with its battle-police removed--would
have melted away. Yet the militias held the line, though God knows they
won very few victories, and even individual desertions were not common.
In four or five months in the P.O.U.M. militia I only heard of four men
deserting, and two of those were fairly certainly spies who had enlisted
to obtain information. At the beginning the apparent chaos, the general
lack of training, the fact that you often had to argue for five minutes
before you could get an order obeyed, appalled and infuriated me. I had
British Army ideas, and certainly the Spanish militias were very unlike
the British Army. But considering the circumstances they were better
troops than one had any right to expect.

Meanwhile, firewood--always firewood. Throughout that period there is
probably no entry in my diary that does not mention firewood, or rather
the lack of it. We were between two and three thousand feet above
sea-level, it was mid winter and the cold was unspeakable. The
temperature was not exceptionally low, on many nights it did not even
freeze, and the wintry sun often shone for an hour in the middle of the
day; but even if it was not really cold, I assure you that it seemed so.
Sometimes there were shrieking winds that tore your cap off and twisted
your hair in all directions, sometimes there were mists that poured into
the trench like a liquid and seemed to penetrate your bones; frequently
it rained, and even a quarter of an hour's rain was enough to make
conditions intolerable. The thin skin of earth over the limestone turned
promptly into a slippery grease, and as you were always walking on a
slope it was impossible to keep your footing. On dark nights I have
often fallen half a dozen times in twenty yards; and this was dangerous,
because it meant that the lock of one's rifle became jammed with mud.
For days together clothes, boots, blankets, and rifles were more or less
coated with mud. I had brought as many thick clothes as I could carry,
but many of the men were terribly underclad. For the whole garrison,
about a hundred men, there were only twelve great-coats, which had to be
handed from sentry to sentry, and most of the men had only one blanket.
One icy night I made a list in my diary of the clothes I was wearing. It
is of some interest as showing the amount of clothes the human body can
carry. I was wearing a thick vest and pants, a flannel shirt, two
pull-overs, a woollen jacket, a pigskin jacket, corduroy breeches,
puttees, thick socks, boots, a stout trench-coat, a muffler, lined
leather gloves, and a woollen cap. Nevertheless I was shivering like a
jelly. But I admit I am unusually sensitive to cold.

Firewood was the one thing that really mattered. The point about the
firewood was that there was practically no firewood to be had. Our
miserable mountain had not even at its best much vegetation, and for
months it had been ranged over by freezing militiamen, with the result
that everything thicker than one's finger had long since been burnt.
When we were not eating, sleeping, on guard, or on fatigue-duty we were
in the valley behind the position, scrounging for fuel. All my memories
of that time are memories of scrambling up and down the almost
perpendicular slopes, over the jagged limestone that knocked one's boots
to pieces, pouncing eagerly on tiny twigs of wood. Three people
searching for a couple of hours could collect enough fuel to keep the
dug-out fire alight for about an hour. The eagerness of our search for
firewood turned us all into botanists. We classified according to their
burning qualities every plant that grew on the mountainside; the various
heaths and grasses that were good to start a fire with but burnt out in
a few minutes, the wild rosemary and the tiny whin bushes that would
burn when the fire was well alight, the stunted oak tree, smaller than a
gooseberry bush, that was practically unburnable. There was a kind of
dried-up reed that was very good for starting fires with, but these grew
only on the hill-top to the left of the position, and you had to go
under fire to get them. If the Fascist machine-gunners saw you they gave
you a drum of ammunition all to yourself. Generally their aim was high
and the bullets sang overhead like birds, but sometime they crackled and
chipped the limestone uncomfortably close, whereupon you flung yourself
on your face. You went on gathering reeds, however; nothing mattered in
comparison with firewood.

Beside the cold the other discomforts seemed petty. Of course all of us
were permanently dirty. Our water, like our food, came on mule-back from
Alcubierre, and each man's share worked out at about a quart a day. It
was beastly water, hardly more transparent than milk. Theoretically it
was for drinking only, but I always stole a pannikinful for washing in
the mornings. I used to wash one day and shave the next; there was never
enough water for both. The position stank abominably, and outside the
little enclosure of the barricade there was excrement everywhere. Some
of the militiamen habitually defecated in the trench, a disgusting thing
when one had to walk round it in the darkness. But the dirt never
worried me. Dirt is a thing people make too much fuss about.
It is astonishing how quickly you get used to doing without a
handkerchief and to eating out of the tin pannikin in which you also
wash. Nor was sleeping in one's clothes any hardship after a day or two.
It was of course impossible to take one's clothes and especially one's
boots off at night; one had to be ready to turn out instantly in case of
an attack. In eighty nights I only took my clothes off three times,
though I did occasionally manage to get them off in the daytime. It was
too cold for lice as yet, but rats and mice abounded. It is often said
that you don't find rats and mice in the same place, but you do when
there is enough food for them.

In other ways we were not badly off. The food was good enough and there
was plenty of wine. Cigarettes were still being issued at the rate of a
packet a day, matches were issued every other day, and there was even an
issue of candles. They were very thin candles, like those on a Christmas
cake, and were popularly supposed to have been looted from churches.
Every dug-out was issued daily with three inches of candle, which would
bum for about twenty minutes. At that time it was still possible to buy
candles, and I had brought several pounds of them with me. Later on the
famine of matches and candles made life a misery. You do not realize the
importance of these things until you lack them. In a night-alarm, for
instance, when everyone in the dug-out is scrambling for his rifle and
treading on everybody else's face, being able to strike a light may make
the difference between life and death. Every militiaman possessed a
tinder-lighter and several yards of yellow wick. Next to his rifle it
was his most important possession. The tinder-lighters had the great
advantage that they could be struck in a wind, but they would only
smoulder, so that they were no use for lighting a fire. When the match
famine was at its worst our only way of producing a flame was to pull
the bullet out of a cartridge and touch the cordite off with a
tinder-lighter.

It was an extraordinary life that we were living--an extraordinary way
to be at war, if you could call it war. The whole militia chafed against
the inaction and clamoured constantly to know why we were not allowed to
attack. But it was perfectly obvious that there would be no battle for a
long while yet, unless the enemy started it. Georges Kopp, on his
periodical tours of inspection, was quite frank with us. 'This is not a
war,' he used to say, 'it is a comic opera with an occasional death.' As
a matter of fact the stagnation on the Aragón front had political causes
of which I knew nothing at that time; but the purely military
difficulties--quite apart from the lack of reserves of men--were obvious
to anybody.

To begin with, there was the nature of the country. The front line, ours
and the Fascists', lay in positions of immense natural strength, which
as a rule could only be approached from one side. Provided a few
trenches have been dug, such places cannot be taken by infantry, except
in overwhelming numbers. In our own position or most of those round us a
dozen men with two machine-guns could have held off a battalion. Perched
on the hill-tops as we were, we should have made lovely marks for
artillery; but there was no artillery. Sometimes I used to gaze round
the landscape and long--oh, how passionately!--for a couple of batteries
of guns. One could have destroyed the enemy positions one after another
as easily as smashing nuts with a hammer. But on our side the guns
simply did not exist. The Fascists did occasionally manage to bring a
gun or two from Zaragoza and fire a very few shells, so few that they
never even found the range and the shells plunged harmlessly into the
empty ravines. Against machine-guns and without artillery there are only
three things you can do: dig yourself in at a safe distance--four
hundred yards, say--advance across the open and be massacred, or make
small-scale night-attacks that will not alter the general situation.
Practically the alternatives are stagnation or suicide.

And beyond this there was the complete lack of war materials of every
description. It needs an effort to realize how badly the militias were
armed at this time. Any public school O.T.C. in England is far more like
a modern army than we were. The badness of our weapons was so
astonishing that it is worth recording in detail.

For this sector of the front the entire artillery consisted of four
trench-mortars with _fifteen rounds_ for each gun. Of course they were
far too precious to be fired and the mortars were kept in Alcubierre.
There were machine-guns at the rate of approximately one to fifty men;
they were oldish guns, but fairly accurate up to three or four hundred
yards. Beyond this we had only rifles, and the majority of the rifles
were scrap-iron. There were three types of rifle in use. The first was
the long Mauser. These were seldom less than twenty years old, their
sights were about as much use as a broken speedometer, and in most of
them the rifling was hopelessly corroded; about one rifle in ten was not
bad, however. Then there was the short Mauser, or mousqueton, really a
cavalry weapon. These were more popular than the others because they
were lighter to carry and less nuisance in a trench, also because they
were comparatively new and looked efficient. Actually they were almost
useless. They were made out of reassembled parts, no bolt belonged to its
rifle, and three-quarters of them could be counted on to jam after five
shots. There were also a few Winchester rifles. These were nice to shoot
with, but they were wildly inaccurate, and as their cartridges had no
clips they could only be fired one shot at a time. Ammunition was so
scarce that each man entering the line was only issued with fifty
rounds, and most of it was exceedingly bad. The Spanish-made cartridges
were all refills and would jam even the best rifles. The Mexican
cartridges were better and were therefore reserved for the machine-guns.
Best of all was the German-made ammunition, but as this came only from
prisoners and deserters there was not much of it. I always kept a clip
of German or Mexican ammunition in my pocket for use in an emergency.
But in practice when the emergency came I seldom fired my rifle; I was
too frightened of the beastly thing jamming and too anxious to reserve
at any rate one round that would go off.

We had no tin hats, no bayonets, hardly any revolvers or pistols, and
not more than one bomb between five or ten men. The bomb in use at this
time was a frightful object known as the 'F.A.I. bomb', it having been
produced by the Anarchists in the early days of the war. It was on the
principle of a Mills bomb, but the lever was held down not by a pin but
a piece of tape. You broke the tape and then got rid of the bomb with
the utmost possible speed. It was said of these bombs that they were
'impartial'; they killed the man they were thrown at and the man who
threw them. There were several other types, even more primitive but
probably a little less dangerous--to the thrower, I mean. It was not
till late March that I saw a bomb worth throwing.

And apart from weapons there was a shortage of all the minor necessities
of war. We had no maps or charts, for instance. Spain has never been
fully surveyed, and the only detailed maps of this area were the old
military ones, which were almost all in the possession of the Fascists.
We had no range-finders, no telescopes, no periscopes, no field-glasses
except for a few privately-owned pairs, no flares or Very lights, no
wire-cutters, no armourers' tools, hardly even any cleaning materials.
The Spaniards seemed never to have heard of a pull-through and looked on
in surprise when I constructed one. When you wanted your rifle cleaned
you took it to the sergeant, who possessed a long brass ramrod which was
invariably bent and therefore scratched the rifling. There was not even
any gun oil. You greased your rifle with olive oil, when you could get
hold of it; at different times I have greased mine with vaseline, with
cold cream, and even with bacon-fat. Moreover, there were no lanterns or
electric torches--at this time there was not, I believe, such a thing as
an electric torch throughout the whole of our sector of the front, and
you could not buy one nearer than Barcelona, and only with difficulty
even there.

As time went on, and the desultory rifle-fire rattled among the hills, I
began to wonder with increasing scepticism whether anything would ever
happen to bring a bit of life, or rather a bit of death, into this
cock-eyed war. It was pneumonia that we were fighting against, not
against men. When the trenches are more than five hundred yards apart no
one gets hit except by accident. Of course there were casualties, but
the majority of them were self-inflicted. If I remember rightly, the
first five men I saw wounded in Spain were all wounded by our own
weapons--I don't mean intentionally, but owing to accident or
carelessness. Our worn-out rifles were a danger in themselves. Some of
them had a nasty trick of going off if the butt was tapped on the
ground; I saw a man shoot himself through the hand owing to this. And in
the darkness the raw recruits were always firing at one another. One
evening when it was barely even dusk a sentry let fly at me from a
distance of twenty yards; but he missed me by a yard--goodness knows how
many times the Spanish standard of marksmanship has saved my life.
Another time I had gone out on patrol in the mist and had carefully
warned the guard commander beforehand. But in coming back I stumbled
against a bush, the startled sentry called out that the Fascists were
coming, and I had the pleasure of hearing the guard commander order
everyone to open rapid fire in my direction. Of course I lay down and
the bullets went harmlessly over me. Nothing will convince a Spaniard,
at least a young Spaniard, that fire-arms are dangerous. Once, rather
later than this, I was photographing some machine-gunners with their
gun, which was pointed directly towards me.

'Don't fire,' I said half-jokingly as I focused the camera.

'Oh no, we won't fire.'

The next moment there was a frightful roar and a stream of bullets tore
past my face so close that my cheek was stung by grains of cordite. It
was unintentional, but the machine-gunners considered it a great joke.
Yet only a few days earlier they had seen a mule-driver accidentally
shot by a political delegate who was playing the fool with an automatic
pistol and had put five bullets in the mule-driver's lungs.

The difficult passwords which the army was using at this time were a
minor source of danger. They were those tiresome double passwords in
which one word has to be answered by another. Usually they were of an
elevating and revolutionary nature, such as _Cultura--progreso_, or
_Seremos--invencibles_, and it was often impossible to get illiterate
sentries to remember these highfalutin' words. One night, I remember,
the password was _Cataluña--heroica_, and a moonfaced peasant lad named
Jaime Domenech approached me, greatly puzzled, and asked me to explain.

'_Heroica_--what does _hroica_ mean?'

I told him that it meant the same as _valiente_. A little while later he
was stumbling up the trench in the darkness, and the sentry challenged
him:

'_Alto! Cataluña_!'

'_Valiente!_' yelled Jaime, certain that he was saying the right thing.

Bang!

However, the sentry missed him. In this war everyone always did miss
everyone else, when it was humanly possible.



Chapter 4


When I had been about three weeks in the line a contingent of twenty or
thirty men, sent out from England by the I.L.P., arrived at Alcubierre,
and in order to keep the English on this front together Williams and I
were sent to join them. Our new position was at Monte Oscuro, several
miles farther west and within sight of Zaragoza.

The position was perched on a sort of razor-back of limestone with
dug-outs driven horizontally into the cliff like sand-martins'nests. They
went into the ground for prodigious distances, and inside they were
pitch dark and so low that you could not even kneel in them, let alone
stand. On the peaks to the left of us there were two more P.O.U.M.
positions, one of them an object of fascination to every man in the
line, because there were three militiawomen there who did the cooking.
These women were not exactly beautiful, but it was found necessary to
put the position out of bounds to men of other companies. Five hundred
yards to our right there was a P.S.U.C. post at the bend of the
Alcubierre road. It was just here that the road changed hands. At night
you could watch the lamps of our supply-lorries winding out from
Alcubierre and, simultaneously, those of the Fascists coming from
Zaragoza. You could see Zaragoza itself, a thin string of lights like
the lighted portholes of a ship, twelve miles south-westward. The
Government troops had gazed at it from that distance since August 1936,
and they are gazing at it still.

There were about thirty of ourselves, including one Spaniard (Ramon,
Williams's brother-in-law), and there were a dozen Spanish
machine-gunners. Apart from the one or two inevitable nuisances--for, as
everyone knows, war attracts riff-raff--the English were an
exceptionally good crowd, both physically and mentally. Perhaps the best
of the bunch was Bob Smillie--the grandson of the famous miners'
leader--who afterwards died such an evil and meaningless death in
Valencia. It says a lot for the Spanish character that the English and
the Spaniards always got on well together, in spite of the language
difficulty. All Spaniards, we discovered, knew two English expressions.
One was 'O.K., baby', the other was a word used by the Barcelona whores
in their dealings with English sailors, and I am afraid the compositors
would not print it.

Once again there was nothing happening all along the line: only the
random crack of bullets and, very rarely, the crash of a Fascist mortar
that sent everyone running to the top trench to see which hill the
shells were bursting on. The enemy was somewhat closer to us here,
perhaps three or four hundred yards away. Their nearest position was
exactly opposite ours, with a machine-gun nest whose loopholes
constantly tempted one to waste cartridges. The Fascists seldom bothered
with rifle-shots, but sent bursts of accurate machine-gun fire at anyone
who exposed himself. Nevertheless it was ten days or more before we had
our first casualty. The troops opposite us were Spaniards, but according
to the deserters there were a few German N.C.O.S. among them. At some
time in the past there had also been Moors there--poor devils, how they
must have felt the cold!--for out in no man's land there was a dead Moor
who was one of the sights of the locality. A mile or two to the left of
us the line ceased to be continuous and there was a tract of country,
lower-lying and thickly wooded, which belonged neither to the Fascists
nor ourselves. Both we and they used to make daylight patrols there. It
was not bad fun in a Boy Scoutish way, though I never saw a Fascist
patrol nearer than several hundred yards. By a lot of crawling on your
belly you could work your way partly through the Fascist lines and could
even see the farm-house flying the monarchist flag, which was the local
Fascist headquarters. Occasionally we gave it a rifle-volley and then
slipped into cover before the machine-guns could locate us. I hope we
broke a few windows, but it was a good eight hundred metres away, and
with our rifles you could not make sure of hitting even a house at that
range.

The weather was mostly clear and cold; sometimes sunny at midday, but
always cold. Here and there in the soil of the hill-sides you found the
green beaks of wild crocuses or irises poking through; evidently spring
was coming, but coming very slowly. The nights were colder than ever.
Coming off guard in the small hours we used to rake together what was
left of the cook-house fire and then stand in the red-hot embers. It was
bad for your boots, but it was very good for your feet. But there were
mornings when the sight of the dawn among the mountain-tops made it
almost worth while to be out of bed at godless hours. I hate mountains,
even from a spectacular point of view. But sometimes the dawn breaking
behind the hill-tops in our rear, the first narrow streaks of gold, like
swords slitting the darkness, and then the growing light and the seas of
carmine cloud stretching away into inconceivable distances, were worth
watching even when you had been up all night, when your legs were numb
from the knees down, and you were sullenly reflecting that there was no
hope of food for another three hours. I saw the dawn oftener during this
campaign than during the rest of my life put together--or during the
part that is to come, I hope.

We were short-handed here, which meant longer guards and more fatigues.
I was beginning to suffer a little from the lack of sleep which is
inevitable even in the quietest kind of war. Apart from guard-duties and
patrols there were constant night-alarms and stand-to's, and in any case
you can't sleep properly in a beastly hole in the ground with your feet
aching with the cold. In my first three or four months in the line I do
not suppose I had more than a dozen periods of twenty-four hours that
were completely without sleep; on the other hand I certainly did not
have a dozen nights of full sleep. Twenty or thirty hours' sleep in a
week was quite a normal amount. The effects of this were not so bad as
might be expected; one grew very stupid, and the job of climbing up and
down the hills grew harder instead of easier, but one felt well and one
was constantly hungry--heavens, how hungry! All food seemed good, even
the eternal haricot beans which everyone in Spain finally learned to
hate the sight of. Our water, what there was of it, came from miles
away, on the backs of mules or little persecuted donkeys. For some
reason the Aragón peasants treated their mules well but their donkeys
abominably. If a donkey refused to go it was quite usual to kick him in
the testicles. The issue of candles had ceased, and matches were running
short. The Spaniards taught us how to make olive oil lamps out of a
condensed milk tin, a cartridge-clip, and a bit of rag. When you had any
olive oil, which was not often, these things would burn with a smoky
flicker, about a quarter candle power, just enough to find your rifle
by.

There seemed no hope of any real fighting. When we left Monte Pocero I
had counted my cartridges and found that in nearly three weeks I had
fired just three shots at the enemy. They say it takes a thousand
bullets to kill a man, and at this rate it would be twenty years before
I killed my first Fascist. At Monte Oscuro the lines were closer and one
fired oftener, but I am reasonably certain that I never hit anyone. As a
matter of fact, on this front and at this period of the war the real
weapon was not the rifle but the megaphone. Being unable to kill your
enemy you shouted at him instead. This method of warfare is so
extraordinary that it needs explaining.

Wherever the lines were within hailing distance of one another there was
always a good deal of shouting from trench to trench. From ourselves:
'_Fascistas--maricones!_' From the Fascists: '_Viva España! Viva
Franco!_'--or, when they knew that there were English opposite them: 'Go
home, you English! We don't want foreigners here!' On the Government
side, in the party militias, the shouting of propaganda to undermine the
enemy morale had been developed into a regular technique. In every
suitable position men, usually machine-gunners, were told off for
shouting-duty and provided with megaphones. Generally they shouted a
set-piece, full of revolutionary sentiments which explained to the
Fascist soldiers that they were merely the hirelings of international
capitalism, that they were fighting against their own class, etc., etc.,
and urged them to come over to our side. This was repeated over and over
by relays of men; sometimes it continued almost the whole night. There
is very little doubt that it had its effect; everyone agreed that the
trickle of Fascist deserters was partly caused by it. If one comes to
think of it, when some poor devil of a sentry--very likely a Socialist
or Anarchist trade union member who has been conscripted against his
will--is freezing at his post, the slogan 'Don't fight against your own
class!' ringing again and again through the darkness is bound to make an
impression on him. It might make just the difference between deserting
and not deserting. Of course such a proceeding does not fit in with the
English conception of war. I admit I was amazed and scandalized when I
first saw it done. The idea of trying to convert your enemy instead of
shooting him! I now think that from any point of view it was a
legitimate manoeuvre. In ordinary trench warfare, when there is no
artillery, it is extremely difficult to inflict casualties on the enemy
without receiving an equal number yourself. If you can immobilize a
certain number of men by making them desert, so much the better;
deserters are actually more useful to you than corpses, because they can
give information. But at the beginning it dismayed all of us; it made us
fed that the Spaniards were not taking this war of theirs sufficiently
seriously. The man who did the shouting at the P.S.U.C. post down on our
right was an artist at the job. Sometimes, instead of shouting
revolutionary slogans he simply told the Fascists how much better we
were fed than they were. His account of the Government rations was apt
to be a little imaginative. 'Buttered toast!'--you could hear his voice
echoing across the lonely valley--'We're just sitting down to buttered
toast over here! Lovely slices of buttered toast!' I do not doubt that,
like the rest of us, he had not seen butter for weeks or months past,
but in the icy night the news of buttered toast probably set many a
Fascist mouth watering. It even made mine water, though I knew he was
lying.

One day in February we saw a Fascist aeroplane approaching. As usual, a
machine-gun was dragged into the open and its barrel cocked up, and
everyone lay on his back to get a good aim. Our isolated positions were
not worth bombing, and as a rule the few Fascist aeroplanes that passed
our way circled round to avoid machine-gun fire. This time the aeroplane
came straight over, too high up to be worth shooting at, and out of it
came tumbling not bombs but white glittering things that turned over and
over in the air. A few fluttered down into the position. They were
copies of a Fascist newspaper, the _Heraldo de Aragón_, announcing the
fall of Málaga.

That night the Fascists made a sort of abortive attack. I was just
getting down into kip, half dead with sleep, when there was a heavy
stream of bullets overhead and someone shouted into the dug-out:
'They're attacking!' I grabbed my rifle and slithered up to my post,
which was at the top of the position, beside the machine-gun. There was
utter darkness and diabolical noise. The fire of, I think five
machine-guns was pouring upon us, and there was a series of heavy
crashes caused by the Fascists flinging bombs over their own parapet in
the most idiotic manner. It was intensely dark. Down in the valley to
the left of us I could see the greenish flash of rifles where a small
party of Fascists, probably a patrol, were chipping in. The bullets were
flying round us in the darkness, crack-zip-crack. A few shells came
whistling over, but they fell nowhere near us and (as usual in this war)
most of them failed to explode. I had a bad moment when yet another
machine-gun opened fire from the hill-top in our rear--actually a gun
that had been brought up to support us, but at the time it looked as
though we were surrounded. Presently our own machine-gun jammed, as it
always did jam with those vile cartridges, and the ramrod was lost in
the impenetrable darkness. Apparently there was nothing that one could
do except stand still and be shot at. The Spanish machine-gunners
disdained to take cover, in fact exposed themselves deliberately, so I
had to do likewise. Petty though it was, the whole experience was very
interesting. It was the first time that I had been properly speaking
under fire, and to my humiliation I found that I was horribly
frightened. You always, I notice, feel the same when you are under heavy
fire--not so much afraid of being hit as afraid because you don't know
where you will be hit. You are wondering all the while just where the
bullet will nip you, and it gives your whole body a most unpleasant
sensitiveness.

After an hour or two the firing slowed down and died away. Meanwhile we
had had only one casualty. The Fascists had advanced a couple of
machine-guns into no man's land, but they had kept a safe distance and
made no attempt to storm our parapet. They were in fact not attacking,
merely wasting cartridges and making a cheerful noise to celebrate the
fall of Málaga. The chief importance of the affair was that it taught me
to read the war news in the papers with a more disbelieving eye. A day
or two later the newspapers and the radio published reports of a
tremendous attack with cavalry and tanks (up a perpendicular hill-side!)
which had been beaten off by the heroic English.

When the Fascists told us that Málaga had fallen we set it down as a
lie, but next day there were more convincing rumours, and it must have
been a day or two later that it was admitted officially. By degrees the
whole disgraceful story leaked out--how the town had been evacuated
without firing a shot, and how the fury of the Italians had fallen not
upon the troops, who were gone, but upon the wretched civilian
population, some of whom were pursued and machine-gunned for a hundred
miles. The news sent a sort of chill all along the line, for, whatever
the truth may have been, every man in the militia believed that the loss
of Málaga was due to treachery. It was the first talk I had heard of
treachery or divided aims. It set up in my mind the first vague doubts
about this war in which, hitherto, the rights and wrongs had seemed so
beautifully simple.

In mid February we left Monte Oscuro and were sent, together with all
the P.O.U.M. troops in this sector, to make a part of the army besieging
Huesca. It was a fifty-mile lorry journey across the wintry plain, where
the clipped vines were not yet budding and the blades of the winter
barley were just poking through the lumpy soil. Four kilometres from our
new trenches Huesca glittered small and clear like a city of dolls'
houses. Months earlier, when Sietamo was taken, the general commanding
the Government troops had said gaily: 'Tomorrow we'll have coffee in
Huesca.' It turned out that he was mistaken. There had been bloody
attacks, but the town did not fall, and 'Tomorrow we'll have coffee in
Huesca' had become a standing joke throughout the army. If I ever go
back to Spain I shall make a point of having a cup of coffee in Huesca.



Chapter 5


On the eastern side of Huesca, until late March, nothing
happened--almost literally nothing. We were twelve hundred metres from
the enemy. When the Fascists were driven back into Huesca the Republican
Army troops who held this part of the line had not been over-zealous in
their advance, so that the line formed a kind of pocket. Later it would
have to be advanced--a ticklish job under fire--but for the present the
enemy might as well have been nonexistent; our sole preoccupation was
keeping warm and getting enough to eat. As a matter of fact there were
things in this period that interested me greatly, and I will describe
some of them later. But I shall be keeping nearer to the order of events
if I try here to give some account of the internal political situation
on the Government side.

At the beginning I had ignored the political side of the war, and it was
only about this time that it began to force itself upon my attention. If
you are not interested in the horrors of party politics, please skip; I
am trying to keep the political parts of this narrative in separate
chapters for precisely that purpose. But at the same time it would be
quite impossible to write about the Spanish war from a purely military
angle. It was above all things a political war. No event in it, at any
rate during the first year, is intelligible unless one has some grasp of
the inter-party struggle that was going on behind the Government lines.

When I came to Spain, and for some time afterwards, I was not only
uninterested in the political situation but unaware of it. I knew there
was a war on, but I had no notion what kind of a war. If you had asked
me why I had joined the militia I should have answered: 'To fight
against Fascism,' and if you had asked me what I was fighting for, I
should have answered: 'Common decency.' I had accepted the _News
Chronicle-New Statesman_ version of the war as the defence of
civilization against a maniacal outbreak by an army of Colonel Blimps in
the pay of Hitler. The revolutionary atmosphere of Barcelona had
attracted me deeply, but I had made no attempt to understand it. As for
the kaleidoscope of political parties and trade unions, with their
tiresome names--P.S.U.C., P.O.U.M., F.A.I., C.N.T., U.G.T., J.C.I.,
J.S.U., A.I.T.--they merely exasperated me. It looked at first sight as
though Spain were suffering from a plague of initials. I knew that I was
serving in something called the P.O.U.M. (I had only joined the P.O.U.M.
militia rather than any other because I happened to arrive in Barcelona
with I.L.P. papers), but I did not realize that there were serious
differences between the political parties. At Monte Pocero, when they
pointed to the position on our left and said: 'Those are the Socialists'
(meaning the P.S.U.C.), I was puzzled and said: 'Aren't we all
Socialists?' I thought it idiotic that people fighting for their lives
should _have_ separate parties; my attitude always was, 'Why can't we
drop all this political nonsense and get on with the war?' This of
course was the correct 'anti-Fascist' attitude which had been carefully
disseminated by the English newspapers, largely in order to prevent
people from grasping the real nature of the struggle. But in Spain,
especially in Catalonia, it was an attitude that no one could or did
keep up indefinitely. Everyone, however unwillingly, took sides sooner
or later. For even if one cared nothing for the political parties and
their conflicting 'lines', it was too obvious that one's own destiny was
involved. As a militiaman one was a soldier against Franco, but one was
also a pawn in an enormous struggle that was being fought out between
two political theories. When I scrounged for firewood on the
mountainside and wondered whether this was really a war or whether the
News Chronicle had made it up, when I dodged the Communist machine-guns
in the Barcelona riots, when I finally fled from Spain with the police
one jump behind me--all these things happened to me in that particular
way because I was serving in the P.O.U.M. militia and not in the
P.S.U.C. So great is the difference between two sets of initials!

To understand the alignment on the Government side one has got to
remember how the war started. When the fighting broke out on 18 July it
is probable that every anti-Fascist in Europe felt a thrill of hope. For
here at last, apparently, was democracy standing up to Fascism. For
years past the so-called democratic countries had been surrendering to
Fascism at every step. The Japanese had been allowed to do as they liked
in Manchuria. Hitler had walked into power and proceeded to massacre
political opponents of all shades. Mussolini had bombed the Abyssinians
while fifty-three nations (I think it was fifty-three) made pious noises
'off'. But when Franco tried to overthrow a mildly Left-wing Government
the Spanish people, against all expectation, had risen against him. It
seemed--possibly it was--the turning of the tide.

But there were several points that escaped general notice. To begin
with, Franco was not strictly comparable with Hitler or Mussolini. His
rising was a military mutiny backed up by the aristocracy and the
Church, and in the main, especially at the beginning, it was an attempt
not so much to impose Fascism as to restore feudalism. This meant that
Franco had against him not only the working class but also various
sections of the liberal bourgeoisie--the very people who are the
supporters of Fascism when it appears in a more modern form. More
important than this was the fact that the Spanish working class did not,
as we might conceivably do in England, resist Franco in the name of
'democracy' and the _status quo_; their resistance was accompanied
by--one might almost say it consisted of--a definite revolutionary
outbreak. Land was seized by the peasants; many factories and most of
the transport were seized by the trade unions; churches were wrecked and
the priests driven out or killed. The _Daily Mail_, amid the cheers of
the Catholic clergy, was able to represent Franco as a patriot
delivering his country from hordes of fiendish 'Reds'.

For the first few months of the war Franco's real opponent was not so
much the Government as the trade unions. As soon as the rising broke out
the organized town workers replied by calling a general strike and then
by demanding--and, after a struggle, getting--arms from the public
arsenals. If they had not acted spontaneously and more or less
independently it is quite conceivable that Franco would never have been
resisted. There can, of course, be no certainty about this, but there is
at least reason for thinking it. The Government had made little or no
attempt to forestall the rising, which had been foreseen for a long time
past, and when the trouble started its attitude was weak and hesitant,
so much so, indeed, that Spain had three premiers in a single day.*
Moreover, the one step that could save the immediate situation, the
arming of the workers, was only taken unwillingly and in response to
violent popular clamour. However, the arms were distributed, and in the
big towns of eastern Spain the Fascists were defeated by a huge effort,
mainly of the working class, aided by some of the armed forces (Assault
Guards, etc.) who had remained loyal. It was the kind of effort that
could probably only be made by people who were fighting with a
revolutionary intention--i.e. believed that they were fighting for
something better than the status quo. In the various centres of revolt
it is thought that three thousand people died in the streets in a single
day. Men and women armed only with sticks of dynamite rushed across the
open squares and stormed stone buildings held by trained soldiers with
machine-guns. Machine-gun nests that the Fascists had placed at
strategic spots were smashed by rushing taxis at them at sixty miles an
hour. Even if one had heard nothing of the seizure of the land by the
peasants, the setting up of local Soviets, etc., it would be hard to
believe that the Anarchists and Socialists who were the backbone of the
resistance were doing this kind of thing for the preservation of
capitalist democracy, which especially in the Anarchist view was no more
than a centralized swindling machine.

[* Footnote: Quiroga, Barrios, and Giral. The first two refused to
distribute arms to the trade unions.]

Meanwhile the workers had weapons in their hands, and at this stage they
refrained from giving them up. (Even a year later it was computed that
the Anarcho-Syndicalists in Catalonia possessed 30,000 rifles.) The
estates of the big pro-Fascist landlords were in many places seized by
the peasants. Along with the collectivization of industry and transport
there was an attempt to set up the rough beginnings of a workers'
government by means of local committees, workers' patrols to replace the
old pro-capitalist police forces, workers' militias based on the trade
unions, and so forth. Of course the process was not uniform, and it went
further in Catalonia than elsewhere. There were areas where the
institutions of local government remained almost untouched, and others
where they existed side by side with revolutionary committees. In a few
places independent Anarchist communes were set up, and some of them
remained in being till about a year later, when they were forcibly
suppressed by the Government. In Catalonia, for the first few months,
most of the actual power was in the hands of the Anarcho-syndicalists,
who controlled most of the key industries. The thing that had happened
in Spain was, in fact, not merely a civil war, but the beginning of a
revolution. It is this fact that the anti-Fascist press outside Spain
has made it its special business to obscure. The issue has been narrowed
down to 'Fascism versus democracy' and the revolutionary aspect
concealed as much as possible. In England, where the Press is more
centralized and the public more easily deceived than elsewhere, only two
versions of the Spanish war have had any publicity to speak of: the
Right-wing version of Christian patriots versus Bolsheviks dripping with
blood, and the Left-wing version of gentlemanly republicans quelling a
military revolt. The central issue has been successfully covered up.

There were several reasons for this. To begin with, appalling lies about
atrocities were being circulated by the pro-Fascist press, and
well-meaning propagandists undoubtedly thought that they were aiding the
Spanish Government by denying that Spain had 'gone Red'. But the main
reason was this: that, except for the small revolutionary groups which
exist in all countries, the whole world was determined, upon preventing
revolution in Spain. In particular the Communist Party, with Soviet
Russia behind it, had thrown its whole weight against the revolution. It
was the Communist thesis that revolution at this stage would be fatal
and that what was to be aimed at in Spain was not workers' control, but
bourgeois democracy. It hardly needs pointing out why 'liberal'
capitalist opinion took the same line. Foreign capital was heavily
invested in Spain. The Barcelona Traction Company, for instance,
represented ten millions of British capital; and meanwhile the trade
unions had seized all the transport in Catalonia. If the revolution went
forward there would be no compensation, or very little; if the
capitalist republic prevailed, foreign investments would be safe. And
since the revolution had got to be crushed, it greatly simplified things
to pretend that no revolution had happened. In this way the real
significance of every event could be covered up; every shift of power
from the trade unions to the central Government could be represented as
a necessary step in military reorganization. The situation produced was
curious in the extreme. Outside Spain few people grasped that there was
a revolution; inside Spain nobody doubted it. Even the P.S.U.C.
newspapers. Communist-controlled and more or less committed to an
antirevolutionary policy, talked about 'our glorious revolution'. And
meanwhile the Communist press in foreign countries was shouting that
there was no sign of revolution anywhere; the seizure of factories,
setting up of workers' committees, etc., had not happened--or,
alternatively, had happened, but 'had no political significance'.
According to the _Daily Worker_ (6 August 1936) those who said that the
Spanish people were fighting for social revolution, or for anything
other than bourgeois democracy, were' downright lying scoundrels'. On
the other hand, Juan Lopez, a member of the Valencia Government,
declared in February 1937 that 'the Spanish people are shedding their
blood, not for the democratic Republic and its paper Constitution, but
for...a revolution'. So it would appear that the downright lying
scoundrels included members of the Government for which we were bidden
to fight. Some of the foreign anti-Fascist papers even descended to the
pitiful lie of pretending that churches were only attacked when they
were used as Fascist fortresses. Actually churches were pillaged
everywhere and as a matter of course, because it was perfectly well
understood that the Spanish Church was part of the capitalist racket. In
six months in Spain I only saw two undamaged churches, and until about
July 1937 no churches were allowed to reopen and hold services, except
for one or two Protestant churches in Madrid.

But, after all, it was only the beginning of a revolution, not the
complete thing. Even when the workers, certainly in Catalonia and
possibly elsewhere, had the power to do so, they did not overthrow or
completely replace the Government. Obviously they could not do so when
Franco was hammering at the gate and sections of the middle class were
on their side. The country was in a transitional state that was capable
either of developing in the direction of Socialism or of reverting to an
ordinary capitalist republic. The peasants had most of the land, and
they were likely to keep it, unless Franco won; all large industries had
been collectivized, but whether they remained collectivized, or whether
capitalism was reintroduced, would depend finally upon which group
gained control. At the beginning both the Central Government and the
Generalite de Cataluña (the semi-autonomous Catalan Government) could
definitely be said to represent the working class. The Government was
headed by Caballero, a Left-wing Socialist, and contained ministers
representing the U.G.T. (Socialist trade unions) and the C.N.T.
(Syndicalist unions controlled by the Anarchists). The Catalan
Generalite was for a while virtually superseded by an anti-Fascist
Defence Committee* consisting mainly of delegates from the trade unions.
Later the Defence Committee was dissolved and the Generalite was
reconstituted so as to represent the unions and the various Left-wing
parties. But every subsequent reshuffling of the Government was a move
towards the Right. First the P.O.U.M. was expelled from the Generalite;
six months later Caballero was replaced by the Right-wing Socialist
Negrin; shortly afterwards the C.N.T. was eliminated from the
Government; then the U.G.T.; then the C.N.T. was turned out of the
Generalite; finally, a year after the outbreak of war and revolution,
there remained a Government composed entirely of Right-wing Socialists,
Liberals, and Communists.

[* Footnote: Comité Central de Milicias Antifascistas. Delegates were
chosen in proportion to the membership of their organizations. Nine
delegates represented the trade unions, three the Catalan Liberal
parties, and two the various Marxist parties (P.O.U.M., Communists, and
others).]

The general swing to the Right dates from about October-November 1936,
when the U.S.S.R. began to supply arms to the Government and power began
to pass from the Anarchists to the Communists. Except Russia and Mexico
no country had had the decency to come to the rescue of the Government,
and Mexico, for obvious reasons, could not supply arms in large
quantities. Consequently the Russians were in a position to dictate
terms. There is very little doubt that these terms were, in substance,
'Prevent revolution or you get no weapons', and that the first move
against the revolutionary elements, the expulsion of the P.O.U.M. from
the Catalan Generalite, was done under orders from the U.S.S.R. It has
been denied that any direct pressure was exerted by the Russian
Government, but the point is not of great importance, for the Communist
parties of all countries can be taken as carrying out Russian policy,
and it is not denied that the Communist Party was the chief mover first
against the P.O.U.M., later against the Anarchists and against
Caballero's section of the Socialists, and, in general, against a
revolutionary policy. Once the U.S.S.R. had intervened the triumph of
the Communist Party was assured.

To begin with, gratitude to Russia for the arms and the fact that the
Communist Party, especially since the arrival of the International
Brigades, looked capable of winning the war, immensely raised the
Communist prestige. Secondly, the Russian arms were supplied via the
Communist Party and the parties allied to them, who saw to it that as
few as possible got to their political opponents.* Thirdly, by
proclaiming a non-revolutionary policy the Communists were able to
gather in all those whom the extremists had scared. It was easy, for
instance, to rally the wealthier peasants against the collectivization
policy of the Anarchists. There was an enormous growth in the membership
of the party, and the influx was largely from the middle
class-shopkeepers, officials, army officers, well-to-do peasants, etc.,
etc. The war was essentially a triangular struggle. The fight against
Franco had to continue, but the simultaneous aim of the Government was
to recover such power as remained in the hands of the trade unions. It
was done by a series of small moves--a policy of pin-pricks, as somebody
called it--and on the whole very cleverly. There was no general and
obvious counter-revolutionary move, and until May 1937 it was scarcely
necessary to use force. The workers could always be brought to heel by
an argument that is almost too obvious to need stating: 'Unless you do
this, that, and the other we shall lose the war.' In every case,
needless to say, it appeared that the thing demanded by military
necessity was the surrender of something that the workers had won for
themselves in 1936. But the argument could hardly fail, because to lose
the war was the last thing that the revolutionary parties wanted; if the
war was lost democracy and revolution. Socialism and Anarchism, became
meaningless words. The Anarchists, the only revolutionary party that was
big enough to matter, were obliged to give way on point after point. The
process of collectivization was checked, the local committees were got
rid of, the workers patrols were abolished and the pre-war police
forces, largely reinforced and very heavily armed, were restored, and
various key industries which had been under the control of the trade
unions were taken over by the Government (the seizure of the Barcelona
Telephone Exchange, which led to the May fighting, was one incident in
this process); finally, most important of all, the workers' militias,
based on the trade unions, were gradually broken up and redistributed
among the new Popular Army, a 'non-political' army on semi-bourgeois
lines, with a differential pay rate, a privileged officer-caste, etc.,
etc. In the special circumstances this was the really decisive step; it
happened later in Catalonia than elsewhere because it was there that the
revolutionary parties were strongest. Obviously the only guarantee that
the workers could have of retaining their winnings was to keep some of
the armed forces under their own control. As usual, the breaking-up of
the militias was done in the name of military efficiency; and no one
denied that a thorough military reorganization was needed. It would,
however, have been quite possible to reorganize the militias and make
them more efficient while keeping them under direct control of the trade
unions; the main purpose of the change was to make sure that the
Anarchists did not possess an army of their own. Moreover, the
democratic spirit of the militias made them breeding-grounds for
revolutionary ideas. The Communists were well aware of this, and
inveighed ceaselessly and bitterly against the P.O.U.M. and Anarchist
principle of equal pay for all ranks. A general 'bourgeoisification', a
deliberate destruction of the equalitarian spirit of the first few
months of the revolution, was taking place. All happened so swiftly that
people making successive visits to Spain at intervals of a few months
have declared that they seemed scarcely to be visiting the same country;
what had seemed on the surface and for a brief instant to be a workers'
State was changing before one's eyes into an ordinary bourgeois republic
with the normal division into rich and poor. By the autumn of 1937 the
'Socialist' Negrin was declaring in public speeches that 'we respect
private property', and members of the Cortes who at the beginning of the
war had had to fly the country because of their suspected Fascist
sympathies were returning to Spain.